Welcome back.
There are a ton of programming languages out there.
We've heard of them right Python Ruby Java C++.
There's a ton and although javascript is the dominant language on the web and with the introduction
of things like node j yes we can now use javascript outside of the web perhaps in the back end server
as well.
The world still has many different languages that are suited for their own domain and ability and if
we had to categorize all these programming languages somehow we'd probably do something like this
in this video.
We're going to talk about the main spectrum here the dynamic and static of how programming languages
can differ dynamically typed and statically tight.
We see over here that JavaScript is a dynamically typed language and so are other popular programming
languages like P HB Ruby Python closure on the other hand languages like Java Haskell scalar C++ are
static or statically typed languages but what does that mean.
Well let me actually just demonstrate a free if I open up the console here and you Oh that's a nice
backyard today.
Anyway back to the console so we can type some javascript in JavaScript because it's dynamically typed.
We can do something like this variable a equals 100.
All right.
That's pretty expected.
We know how javascript works and that's fine.
But in some languages this wouldn't work.
You see a dynamically typed language allows us to not have to say what type of variable this variable
a is going to be.
What does that mean.
Well in a statically typed language let's say we were writing C++ which is a statically typed language
we'd have to do something like this and I won't get highlighting because well this browser won't recognize
C++ but if I was about to do the same thing I would have to say into a and it stands for an integer
and then on a new line I'll say you let me add a semicolon here and on a new line I'd say that A equals
one hundred you see with a statically typed language I have to say what kind of type this variable is
going to be.
In this case it's an integer.
If this was a string like a hello I'd have to say string and so on and so forth.
So with a statically type language we have to declare the variables explicitly before using them dynamically
typed languages are not bound to this constraint.
They're not bound to a particular type.
JavaScript is smart enough and it's going to say oh yes yes yes.
Variable a that's one hundred.
Oh yeah.
That's an integer it's an integer type.
Wow I'm so smart.
That's what javascript is saying and in dynamically typed languages type checking is done during runtime.
What does that mean.
Well if you remember in our discussion about the browser performance javascript gets run on the browser
in the runtime or in git or just in time compilation while the user is actually browsing through the
Web site javascript is running and being compiled in the background.
If you remember our performance tab we had our scripting performance metric which was that yellow pie
graph or the piece of the pie graph that was yellow that included the compile of the javascript as well.
And because of that we're able to use dynamically typed languages that can assign anything to any variable
and you're not gonna be caught you might get errors during runtime while the users browsing the web
site but because of this we're able to just not have to worry about this looks pretty nice right.
Why would we ever want to do this.
This is just so much cleaner and easier for us to write.
Well we're gonna see why that might not always be ideal and why it might cause a problem.
But before we get to that there's been a holy war going on in programming languages.
People that think statically typed languages are the way to go and think dynamically typed languages
are horrible and vice versa.
People there say oh aesthetically type languages are a waste of time and dynamic programming languages
are the way to go because of that I'm treading lightly on this topic because people are so opinionated
they have such strong opinions about this.
But again a senior developers let's not focus on what is right what is wrong.
Let's focus on pros and cons when one is good over the other so that we can make smart decisions.
Let's talk about the pros the number one thing with a statically typed language like this is that we
get documentation perhaps a better way to demonstrate this is to actually write a function if let's
say I was going to delete this and say function some and in this some here I'm going to use a bit of
a syntax that might not be familiar to you.
But for now it's fine we'll just we'll just assume that this works we'll say a is a no and b there's
also a number and in here we can just return a plus b
and close our function bracket.
This is in javascript if we ran this war going to get an error but this demonstrates what a statically
typed language could do.
You see if a new developer came along and ran the some function with something other than a number let's
say that they ran the sum function with some hello and maybe something No well this before we're ever
even going to put this code on the browser are in production is going to error out because it's going
to say you're doing something wrong here.
I'm expecting a number and a number here and you're not giving me any of that and in that sense statically
type languages are self documenting.
That is I can come onto a project and immediately see that even if this was named badly and this was
a complicated function I can see what kind of parameters it expects and I avoid making that error the
second pro of a static typed language is that because of this feature with our I.D. or text editors
like sublime or visual code or any of your favorite text editor.
This helps with auto completion and your editors.
You can download plugins that say hey even before you run this.
This should be a number that's also really nice when you're developing.
Finally the most important thing.
And yes there are many more pros but we're just focusing on the main ones here.
The main thing of statically typed languages is that you're going to get less bugs you're gonna get
less bugs in production because this will never make it into production.
If this fails at what we call compile time that is before we even send it onto a browser then we catch
that early we catch those bugs early so that in production most of the time there's going to be less
bugs with a statically typed language.
And don't worry we're going to talk about compiling and how that works later on now.
That sounds pretty great thus bugs.
Easy documentation helpful auto completion in editors so why don't we just do a statically typed language.
Well there's some cons.
No one is that we obviously just made our code a little bit more harder to read.
It's more complex now we're just adding another layer to our programs and this takes time to time to
learn if we have a project and we have new people joining our company.
We're going to have to teach them how to write more code and how to write this properly it's an extra
layer of complexity and that's always a concern with programming right.
Adding an extra layer of complexity is that really going to benefit the project.
The other cons or argument against statically type languages is that well why can't you just write better
tests.
A topic that we cover in another section.
Many people get very very excited about static typing and forget about writing good tests good unit
tests before you have static typing especially in a language like Javascript.
Make sure that you have good unit tests and you don't forget about writing unit tests and assume.
Oh yeah.
Just because I have static typing I'm not gonna get any bugs that simply isn't true finally with a statically
typed language.
You're gonna have a slower development process because you now have an extra step where while you're
coding along there's also another check to see that you're not making any type errors and this actually
just slows down the development process and how fast you can create code and run code and ship it to
production.
You see with dynamically typed languages and this is why javascript was so popular is that you spend
less time debugging syntax and semantic errors like this and instead most of your debugging time is
spent purely on logic and errors which as a developer are a lot more interesting.
All right let's go back to this.
There are a few other pros and cons and everybody always has opinions when it comes to these two topics
but the main point is this.
Static types usually prevent bugs and help keep errors from happening dynamic typing allows you to be
more flexible and write software faster typescript allows us to make javascript to behave like a statically
typed language it adds types to JavaScript so it makes javascript extra safe but before I go on and
show you a demonstration of how typescript works let's talk about the other two parts of this graph
that often get confused with dynamic and static typing I'll see in the next one by.